[BLOG] add numba-polynomial-support.md (#769)
Quansight/Quansight-website: apps/labs/posts/numba-polynomial-support.md

## Adding support for Power Series in Numba

> Similarly to functions, NumPy classes have to be reimplemented in Numba using its low-level API. A good example of this can be found in the [Numba documentation](https://numba.readthedocs.io/en/stable/extending/interval-example.html#example-an-interval-type), which I followed very closely. The first big task when working on the `Polynomial` class was defining a new Numba type to represent the class. After creating a type class called `PolynomialType`, I needed to "show" Numba that each instance of the `Polynomial` class should be treated by Numba as if its type is `PolynomialType`, using the `@typeof_impl.register(np.polynomial.polynomial.Polynomial)` decorator. Another important part is defining the constructor for the Polynomial class. Me and my mentor decided to add support for `Polynomial(coef)` and `Polynomial(coef, domain, window)` at this point. As a general rule, nopython mode does not work on Python objects directly. Each type supported in nopython mode therefore has to define a tailored native representation, also called a data model. Finally, I had to define special methods for converting between the NumPy object and the Numba data model. Those are called boxing and unboxing, the idea being that a Python object can be seen as a sophisticated box containing a simple native value which is what the data model needs. The tricky part in my implementation of those two was that I had to keep track of whether the `domain` and `window` were defined by the user or they equal the default value. This part is necessary since the default values of those two parameters can never be set using the constructor, as mentioned above.

Reviewer: I would also try to break this paragraph into smaller pieces, since it is pretty complex to read.

## Further work on support for NumPy polynomials
Thanks to the support I have received from my mentor - [Guilherme Leobas](https://guilhermeleobas.github.io/), I am now finalizing the implementation of the class. After the respective pull request is closed, there is a lot of room for further work. For example, NumPy supports 5 more types of polynomials - Chebyshev Series, two types of Hermite series, Laguerre, and Legendre. All of those have the same class structure as the Power Series, but the behaviour of their methods is different which reflects the different kinds of operations that are being done on them, e.g. the coefficients array of a product of two Chebyshev series is not the same as if we were to multiply Legendre series.

## Acknowledgements

> I would like to thank [Quansight](https://github.com/Quansight-Labs) and [Christ Church College, Oxford](https://www.chch.ox.ac.uk/), for providing me the opportunity to work on impactful open source projects in such an amazing environment. I am grateful to my mentor, [Guilherme Leobas](https://guilhermeleobas.github.io/), for the invaluable support throughout the internship. I would also like to thank [Melissa Weber Mendonça](https://github.com/melissawm) for helping me with any general queries as well as sharing her OSS experience during our internship sessions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I would like to thank [Quansight](https://github.com/Quansight-Labs) and [Christ Church College, Oxford](https://www.chch.ox.ac.uk/), for providing me the opportunity to work on impactful open source projects in such an amazing environment. I am grateful to my mentor, [Guilherme Leobas](https://guilhermeleobas.github.io/), for the invaluable support throughout the internship. I would also like to thank [Melissa Weber Mendonça](https://github.com/melissawm) for helping me with any general queries as well as sharing her OSS experience during our internship sessions.

```

Numba developers keep track of unsupported NumPy functions in [issue #4074](https://github.com/numba/numba/issues/4074). My first task was simple: pick functions from the list and implement them. I started by searching the list for functions that have already been implemented or ones that have been deprecated by NumPy. Then, I decided to pick the function `numpy.geomspace`, since a very similar function, `numpy.logspace`, had been implemented already, and this was a great starting point for me. This helped me introduce myself to the Numba development workflow and the repository structure.

After my first Pull Request was merged, I moved on to other functions from the list. Other NumPy functions that I added support as a Quansight Labs intern include `np.vsplit`, `np.hsplit`, `np.dsplit`, `np.rowstack`, `np.diagflat`, `np.resize`, `np.indices`, `np.unwrap`. A great guide to using the `@overload` decorator is given in the [Numba documentation](https://numba.readthedocs.io/en/stable/extending/overloading-guide.html#a-guide-to-using-overload).

## The NumPy polynomial API

> When choosing functions to implement, I was always looking for groups of similar functions. That way, I could get more functions checked from the list more quickly. This led me to implementing `polyadd, polysub, polymul` from `numpy.polynomial.polynomial` simultaneously. After seeing this, my mentor asked me if I would like to focus on support for the NumPy polynomial package. I agreed since I felt like this would be a good way of working with lower levels of Numba. In addition to adding other functions from the polynomial API, the biggest task during my internship was implementing the `Polynomial` class. It is fairly simple as it has three parameters - `coef`, `domain`, and `window`, each of which is a NumPy array. This meant that the foundation of the implementation was fairly straightforward. Unfortunately, there were a lot of details in the behaviour of the class, and each small detail seemed challenging when I had to implement it using the low-level API. The most interesting thing about the implementation of the class is that the two optional parameters - `domain` and `window`, have default values that are NumPy arrays of integer dtype, whereas if the user decides to set `domain` and `window`, then these arrays are always cast to arrays of double dtype. This meant that the user could never set the values of these two parameters to their default values.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When choosing functions to implement, I was always looking for groups of similar functions. That way, I could get more functions checked from the list more quickly. This led me to implementing `polyadd`, `polysub` and `polymul` from `numpy.polynomial.polynomial` simultaneously. After seeing this, my mentor asked me if I would like to focus on support for the NumPy polynomial package. I agreed since I felt like this would be a good way of working with lower levels of Numba. In addition to adding other functions from the polynomial API, the biggest task during my internship was implementing the [`Polynomial`](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.polynomial.polynomial.Polynomial.html) class. It is fairly simple as it has three parameters - `coef`, `domain`, and `window`, each of which is a NumPy array. This meant that the foundation of the implementation was fairly straightforward. Unfortunately, there were a lot of details in the behaviour of the class, and each small detail seemed challenging when I had to implement it using the low-level API. The most interesting thing about the implementation of the class is that the two optional parameters - `domain` and `window`, have default values that are NumPy arrays of integer dtype, whereas if the user decides to set `domain` and `window`, then these arrays are always cast to arrays of double dtype. This meant that the user could never set the values of these two parameters to their default values.
```

Reviewer 3: You can also mention the NumPy pull request (https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/24745)

## Adding support for Power Series in Numba

> Similarly to functions, NumPy classes have to be reimplemented in Numba using its low-level API. A good example of this can be found in the [Numba documentation](https://numba.readthedocs.io/en/stable/extending/interval-example.html#example-an-interval-type), which I followed very closely. The first big task when working on the `Polynomial` class was defining a new Numba type to represent the class. After creating a type class called `PolynomialType`, I needed to "show" Numba that each instance of the `Polynomial` class should be treated by Numba as if its type is `PolynomialType`, using the `@typeof_impl.register(np.polynomial.polynomial.Polynomial)` decorator. Another important part is defining the constructor for the Polynomial class. Me and my mentor decided to add support for `Polynomial(coef)` and `Polynomial(coef, domain, window)` at this point. As a general rule, nopython mode does not work on Python objects directly. Each type supported in nopython mode therefore has to define a tailored native representation, also called a data model.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Similarly to functions, NumPy classes have to be reimplemented in Numba using its low-level API. A good example of this can be found in the [Numba documentation](https://numba.readthedocs.io/en/stable/extending/interval-example.html#example-an-interval-type), which I followed very closely. The first big task when working on the `Polynomial` class was defining a new Numba type to represent the class. After creating a type class called `PolynomialType`, I needed to "show" Numba that each instance of the `Polynomial` class should be treated by Numba as if its type is `PolynomialType`, using the `@typeof_impl.register(np.polynomial.polynomial.Polynomial)` decorator. Another important part is defining the constructor for the Polynomial class. We decided to add support for `Polynomial(coef)` and `Polynomial(coef, domain, window)` at this point. The next step is to define a data model for the new type. That is, how the Polynomial type will be represented in LLVM IR. 
```

> The final task when adding support for an external class in Numba is defining special methods for converting between the NumPy object and the Numba data model. Those are called boxing and unboxing, the idea being that a Python object can be seen as a sophisticated box containing a simple native value which is what the data model needs. The tricky part in my implementation of those two was that I had to keep track of whether the `domain` and `window` were defined by the user or they equal the default value. This part is necessary since the default values of those two parameters can never be set using the constructor, as mentioned above.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The final task when adding support for a new type in Numba is defining special methods for converting Python objects into native values and vice versa. Those operations are called boxing and unboxing. The idea being that a Python object can be seen as a sophisticated box containing a simple native value which is what the data model needs. The tricky part in my implementation of those two was that I had to keep track of whether the `domain` and `window` were defined by the user or they equal the default value. This part is necessary since the default values of those two parameters can never be set using the constructor, as mentioned above.
```

## Further work on support for NumPy polynomials

> Thanks to the support I have received from my mentor - [Guilherme Leobas](https://guilhermeleobas.github.io/), I am now finalizing the implementation of the class. After the respective pull request is closed, there is a lot of room for further work. For example, NumPy supports 5 more types of polynomials - Chebyshev Series, two types of Hermite series, Laguerre, and Legendre. All of those have the same class structure as the Power Series, but the behaviour of their methods is different which reflects the different kinds of operations that are being done on them, e.g. the coefficients array of a product of two Chebyshev series is not the same as if we were to multiply Legendre series.

Reviewer 3: The PR was merged a few days ago. So, you can remove the part where you say you're finalizing the implementation of the class.

```suggestion
Thanks to the support I have received from my mentor - [Guilherme Leobas](https://github.com/guilhermeleobas). After the respective pull request is closed, there is a lot of room for further work. For example, NumPy supports 5 more types of polynomials - Chebyshev Series, two types of Hermite series, Laguerre, and Legendre. All of those have the same class structure as the Power Series, but the behaviour of their methods is different which reflects the different kinds of operations that are being done on them, e.g. the coefficients array of a product of two Chebyshev series is not the same as if we were to multiply Legendre series.
```

## Acknowledgements

> I would like to thank [Quansight](https://github.com/Quansight-Labs) and [Christ Church College, Oxford](https://www.chch.ox.ac.uk/), for providing me the opportunity to work on impactful open source projects in such an amazing environment. I am grateful to my mentor, [Guilherme Leobas](https://guilhermeleobas.github.io/), for the invaluable support throughout the internship. I would also like to thank [Melissa Weber Mendonça](https://github.com/melissawm) for helping me with any general queries as well as sharing her OSS experience during our internship sessions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
I would like to thank [Quansight](https://github.com/Quansight-Labs) and [Christ Church College, Oxford](https://www.chch.ox.ac.uk/), for providing me the opportunity to work on impactful open source projects in such an amazing environment. I am grateful to my mentor, [Guilherme Leobas](https://github.com/guilhermeleobas), for the invaluable support throughout the internship. I would also like to thank [Melissa Weber Mendonça](https://github.com/melissawm) for helping me with any general queries as well as sharing her OSS experience during our internship sessions.
```
